so tom yes i wanted to share with you uh
i don't think you've heard this
it's a lot of people will have heard
this it's kind of a fun little puzzle
about repeated exponentiation
but you open this can of worms and it
can get as deep as you want we'll just
do things
kind of quickly right now all right um
but
let's say i take x to the power of x to
the power of x to the power of x
and i go on and on and on and on right
um
if i just do this forever and i say i
want to find some value of x
so that this is equal to two okay right
um how about how much you go about
finding an answer to something like this
um i feel like it wouldn't be helpful to
move x's around
yeah yeah you'd find yourself doing
something like oh all we have to do is
take roots we're just going to take
the right side of the second side what's
the route that we take oh it's
the yeah it's the same that's not going
to be helpful
i'll just do that a bunch until you're
like
um so in that case i'm having an inkling
it's something to do with
the fact that it goes on and on and on
yes is that it i feel like the fact that
it's
so we're assuming here that there's this
infinite interest so that to me
that's hinting at something that's going
to play a role classic problem-solving
uh strategy when you have this sort of
infinite thing
is to leverage self-similarity where
inside the expression is a copy of
itself
which depends on the infinity which is
kind of funny yeah yeah because the
whole property of infinity is that if
you add one you don't change
size in some sense right you're an
infinite set it means if you add one you
can still
have a one-to-one correspondence with
yourself um so you leverage this idea
and what that means is uh we have a copy
of the original and say oh well we know
what that has to be it's got to be 2.
so x x squared equals 2. which means
uh x is going to be the square root of 2
right
yeah okay which seems lovely and
beautiful right
until i ask you a similar question
which is we're gonna solve the same
equation xxx we just keep going on and
on i'm gonna kill that fly for you
um equals four
so how would you proceed here i'm going
to
guess that we're going to try and use
the same kind of method great right
so what's the next step so then it's
going to be x sub 4 is equal to four
and so then we're going to want to take
fourth roots
so that's going to give us back to root
two again
right so that doesn't seem to make sense
because what he seems to say is if we
take root two
to its own power to its own power on and
on and on and on
that that equals two right yes but it
also seems to say that that equals four
so i've probably done something i'm not
allowed to do
right so when you're dealing with an
infinite process like this
uh it's important to be very clear on
exactly what you mean yeah
uh one way that you might think about
this is
let's say we've got the function f of x
is equal to
the square root of two to the x okay
yeah this is like one point four one
four to this to itself or something
yeah and what you do is you start with a
seed of one and
then you run it through f and you'll get
root two
then you run it through f again and
that's root two to the power root two
and if you keep going on you're saying
what we have is a certain infinite
sequence
and often when people see dot dot dot
and then equal we're meant to assume
that
this sequence approaches something right
so maybe let's just verify that
experimentally
it seems a good idea yeah so i can pull
up some python just to
all right so we're going to define a to
be
the square root of two yep all right so
that's what it looks like
and now i'm going to define um f of x
to be a to the power x yep
yep so if i take f of one uh
oh gotta return that
return a to the power x
great so f of one should be the square
root of two
f of f of one should be something else
yes so we could do is say we're going to
start with um
uh let's call it c is equal to one and
then we're going to set
c equal to f of c and then print it out
right and presumably as i repeat this
process over and over
we'll get something kind of keep
repeating maybe get tired and write a
for loop
i don't know 100. um let's just keep
doing this c
is equal to f c and then i want to print
out what it is
and it looks actually pretty good right
it does yeah
i'm seeing um a bunch of one point nine
nine nines and it gets really close to
two i think it's slightly above two
yeah at this point yeah it might be
numerical error right because computers
can't know
um irrational numbers perfectly yeah um
so it's it seems like the the empirical
answer is
two but not four yeah so our logic
got us the right answer but it can't be
completely for the right reason because
the same logic
applies to that yeah yeah aside from
finding the exact answer to this it's a
little interesting that it converged at
all
yeah because i mean okay let's just uh
let's just do this with a different
value like um
if i take z equal to two and then c is
going to be
two to the power of whatever c already
is right and maybe we'll do that and
then print
c right it's like we get 16 and then
we'll take two to the power of that
which is six five five three six right
so we take it very very
big very very quickly right
actually this is what i love about
python right that it doesn't care about
the size
it's like yeah that can take a lot of
space so the next step right which is
just like the fifth step
or whatever is two to the power of this
wall which
i don't i don't want to die so it
explodes super quickly and yet square
root of two it seemed to converge
right so we could play this game
actually um
like what if it was 1.5 right what if we
were taking we started c at one
and then we take c equals 1.5 to the
power of c
and look at what it is right so we first
get 1.5 then 1.8
2.1 we kind of keep doing this and we
can do this
so they're certainly getting bigger but
yeah it's whether or not they're going
to go to infinity i guess
yeah um yeah
result too large yeah because yeah at
some point we're taking 1.5 to this
uh so 1.5 blows up right and yet square
root of 2
which is 1.41 didn't blow up
right um so
what you should ask is when does it blow
up and when does it not
mm-hmm absolutely um which is kind of
this is very visual to think about where
uh you know about cobweb diagrams
yeah i do yes yes i teach them in math
biology yeah awesome sorry
because when you have like an iterative
repeated process like a population
who where the rule for going from one
phase to another
is the same you're just kind of yeah and
you want to say yeah see if it blows up
i see if it converges to a stable
population number that's exactly what we
do
so let's say this is x i'm going to draw
the line
y equals x right and then let's say we
have
some kind of exponential curve that
looks like
a to the x right yes so when we want to
play this process of we've got
a zero notion called a0 c 0 is equal to
and then c 1 is equal to f
c 0. yep and we sort of repeat that
we're feeding it into itself sfc one
on and on um the way we could think
about this is okay
uh our first value is an input of one
sitting here so that's c so the output
is wherever it is on that graph right
but the output right now is represented
with a y value so if we want to turn
that into an
input we say what is the point where we
can see where the x value is the same as
this y value
so we hop over to the graph where y
equals x yeah right
and that gets us here so that kind of
represents where c one
is and then we apply the function again
yes
exactly we land on the graph and then
again we say oh let's make that our
input value so we have to make it x
and i actually think cobweb diagrams are
a slightly awkward way to think about
iteration sometimes
but can be very helpful yeah um
now in this context yeah now it just it
goes up it's going to go up and you're
not going to get
let's go to infinity isn't it yeah um
but some exponential curves will look a
little bit different
okay so an exponential curve passes
through one
this will be here and let's say it
we're going to have it go and like
gently come in and then out
so it it's something that just barely
got into touching it
so when we start at uh one
we go up to the graph okay great great
then we cobweb over here
and then go up and over and up and over
and we approach
wherever it intersects great that makes
sense um
so this would be like two uh certainly
in the case that we were looking at here
oh yeah exactly evidently when we do
root two
so that's actually just let's straight
up do this um i'll go back to my
computer which i've got
a little desmos situation going on here
um where let's say
a is equal to square root of two okay
yeah awesome so in this context i have a
graph
yeah so we've got a graph that is uh
uh square root of two to the power x
and it actually looks like they
intersect right at two
which we know is true right because
square root of two to the power two
is that yes um so it's a little bit more
fun is if
we try different values of a right so i
had a slider for a
and in that context let me make this
range from one
up to three sometimes
it doesn't hit yeah and that's where we
know things are going to blow up
and then sometimes it does right
and if we take a look notice that
remember where converge is gonna is
gonna be where they intersect
yeah right so here that intersection
seems to happen a little above two
but by the time it separates right it's
separating here
that intersection never got as high as
four no yeah so there doesn't even exist
an x such that this repeated process
will land you on four
instead it's like i converge to
something a little above two yeah and
then
without passing through without passing
go right you go straight to jail
the jail of divergence to infinity yeah
right um
that seems to be what happens let's
figure out what value of a
yes this is right that's what i want to
know because as i'm watching this
like we i want to like you've just shown
that that for those you know we know it
works route 2
1.4 ish if we go to like 1.5 it's too
big
so like what's that value in between if
it's because it seemed to be a little
bit more than route 2.
so there's nothing yeah so it looks like
it's what
1.45 ish that seems to be the right
neighborhood
um i actually did not really think this
through
before coming here today but i think we
can solve it together because we're not
math folks yeah presumably
we've got y equals x yeah exactly and
over here we've got um
a to the x yeah so uh if their tangents
are going to be equal to each other
uh then we know that the derivative
of a to the x is equal to the natural
log of
a times a to the x
and so we're looking for a point x
naught
so that this is equal to one because its
slope has to be yes all right so
ln of a times a to the x naught
has to equal one
we don't know what a is we also don't
know what x naught is we
need a second equation right yes
clearly which is that we're sitting on
the line y equals x
right so it's got to be the case that x
naught
um they're intersecting as well as their
gradients they have to be the same
intersection point
yeah exactly so their gradients are
equal and so therefore x naught must
equal a to the x naught
yeah exactly okay must equal a to the x
map
great then you take that
put that into here okay great great so
now we know that
x naught is x naught is equal to
a no no not a e to the e
to the x x naught to the negative one
both the power of
song it's not great um
which is good so they're multiplying in
there so that's
x naught is oh so x naught is equal to e
okay now we get e to the power of one
over e
yeah um which let's just
go ahead and check that if we take um
e to the power of one over e
yeah okay so that's 1.44 which seems to
be what we're seeing
on the graph for down there awesome so
that's the cutoff and we could uh
this is one e is whatever there's going
to be a lower bound too
right which because there should be
multiple solutions to this
um that will give us like the other end
for our range of convergence
first of all just to give an indication
of what what it would mean yeah
um it's if what would it mean actually
um so the idea being that we need this
intersection
yeah we need that as we make a
sufficiently small
except it's not just that we need them
to intersect at some point it's got to
be that the slope
of uh the slope of our a to the x graph
is less than one so that when we do our
cop webbing we go towards the
intersection and not away from it
that's all situation i see but then if
that slope
was uh let's see so if that slope was
too big
um or if we're coming at it from the
other direction then it's too small
yeah we would cobweb away from it yes oh
i see
yeah yeah yeah so i think i'd be looking
for the point
yeah okay because let's say we've got um
on some graph really zoomed in this is
what
like a to the x looks like as it passes
through
um y equals x and then when we're
cobwebbing
we'll like start here and then
go to the right and then come down
and then go until we hit it yeah and
then go up
and then it's a question yeah so as soon
as a to the x
as a graph is a little too steep then
it'll diverge away
right so i think i think we'd be looking
for when it's intersecting with a curve
and also has a slope of negative one
okay that so in the same way that here
we're solving for when the slope is one
just substitute negative negative one
yeah um and then you can see the lower
bound
on it which is fun it is fun i agree
and the last thing i'd leave someone
with is to google tetration fractal
okay because you can ask okay we're
doing this on the real number line
which complex numbers for a will make
this
process converge versus diverge and
very interesting
but as a solution to um the original
puzzle on why does it
why does it seem to be two and four
simultaneously
the the mere assumption that there even
exists an x such that this process could
yield four
is wrong yes to solve an equation you
have to know that the equation
has a solution right are you sure yeah
that's what i got for you that was
awesome that was great thank you so much
you